migration/8.0.md, before:




# GHC 8.0.x Migration Guide



This guide summarises the changes you may need to make to your code to migrate from GHC 7.10 to GHC 8.0. This guide complements the GHC 8.0.x release notes which should be consulted as well.


---


## Compiler changes


### Impredicative types brokenness



Note that the `-XImpredicativeTypes` extension, which has been
[known](impredicative-polymorphism) to be broken for many years, is even more
broken than usual in this release (see [\#11319](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/11319), [\#11675](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/11675), and others). During pre-release testing we encountered
a number of projects that broke with confusing type errors due to (often
unnecessary) use of `-XImpredicativeTypes`. Users of 
`-XImpredicativeTypes` do so at their own risk!


### More conservative use of superclass constraints while solving



The compiler is now a bit more conservative in solving constraints previously
provided by superclasses (see [\#11762](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/11762)). For instance, consider this program,


```
{-# LANGUAGE FlexibleInstances #-}
{-# LANGUAGE UndecidableInstances #-}

class Super a
class (Super a) => Left a
class (Super a) => Right a
instance (Left a) => Right a    -- this is now an error
```


GHC now rejects the `Right a` instance, claiming it cannot deduce the `Super a`
superclass constraint of the `Right` typeclass. This stands in contrast to
previous releases, which would accept this declaration, using the `Super a`
constraint implied by the `Left a` constraint. To fix this simply add the
needed superclass constraint explicitly,


```
instance (Left a, Super a) => Right a
```

### `-fwarn-pointless-pragmas`



This flag has been removed and replaced by two flags `-Wmissed-specialisations` and `-Wall-missed-specialisations`.


### Old GADT record syntax



The old syntax for record constructors for a GADT has been removed


```
-- Old Syntax
data G2 a :: * where
  G2A { g2a :: a, g2b :: Int } :: G2 a

-- New Syntax
data G2 a :: * where
  G2A :: { g2a :: a, g2b :: Int } -> G2 a

```


This flag was widely regarded as a misfeature, in prior versions it issued a deprecation warning, it is now not supported at all.


### Old QuasiQuote syntax



The old syntax which allowed quotes to be prefixed by `$` has been removed. 


```
-- Old Syntax
foo = [$x| ... ] 

-- New Syntax
foo = [x| ... ]
```

### Kind-level definitions shuffled around



If you're using various bits of magic from within GHC and importing from `GHC.Prim` (for example, for `Constraint`), you'll find that some definitions have moved around. There is a simple fix: import from `GHC.Exts` instead. That module re-exports all of `GHC.Prim` and a few other internal modules. This change is also backward-compatible.


## Pattern Synonym Signatures


1. The ordering of the constraints has been changed so that required constraints appear before provided constraints. 

1. A single set of constraints corresponds to a set of required rather than provided constraints. 


For example:


```
--before

pattern P1 :: prov => req => ty

pattern P2 :: prov => ty

pattern P3 :: ()  => req => ty

pattern P4 :: ty

-- after 

pattern P1 :: req => prov => ty

pattern P2 :: ()  => prov => ty

pattern P3 :: req => ty

pattern P4 :: ty

```

---


## Library changes


### `base-4.9.0.0`


#### Recommendations for forward-compatibility



**TLDR**: The gist of the following paragraphs is to add some variation of the following snippet to your `.cabal` file, and address the warnings emitted by GHC when compiling your package:


```wiki
  if impl(ghc >= 8.0)
    ghc-options: -Wcompat -Wnoncanonical-monad-instances -Wnoncanonical-monadfail-instances
  else
    -- provide/emulate `Control.Monad.Fail` and `Data.Semigroups` API for pre-GHC8
    build-depends: fail == 4.9.*, semigroups == 0.18.*
```


The following suggestions are not mandatory but recommended for those who wish to make their code-bases compatible and/or make use of newly added features starting with GHC 8.0 thereby increasing the chance of extending the compatibility window of their code-base early on.


<table><tr><th>Normalise `Applicative`/`Monad` instance definitions</th>
<td>
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> `base-4.9.0.0` continues to generalise functions from `Monad` to `Applicative`. However, in order to avoid performance regressions due to sub-optimally defined `Applicative`/`Monad` instances, it's highly advised to follow the
> [ AMP+MRP refactoring guidelines ](migration/7.10#)
> that were already provided in the [GHC 7.10.x Migration Guide](migration/7.10).
>
>

>
>
> A new warning that needs to be enabled via `-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances` (not implied by `-Wcompat`) is available to help detect code which may be at risk.
>
>

<table><tr><th>Provide `Semigroup`/`Monoid` instances definitions</th>
<td>
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> Starting with `base-4.9.0.0`, `Data.Semigroup` has moved into `base`, kicking off the   [
> prime:Libraries/Proposals/SemigroupMonoid](https://prime.haskell.org/intertrac/Libraries/Proposals/SemigroupMonoid) roadmap which will eventually lead to have `Semigroup` become a proper superclass of `Monoid`.
>
>

>
>
> In order to smooth the transition, it's important to have `Semigroup` instances in place as soon as possible, especially in library packages. In order to aid detecting missing instances two warnings have been implemented in GHC 8.0 (both implied by `-Wcompat`): `-Wnoncanonical-monoid-instances` and `-Wsemigroup`. Those warnings also help defining the instances in compliance with the envisioned transition scheme.
>
>

>
>
> The [
> hackage:semigroups](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/semigroups) package can be used to avoid `-XCPP` usage by providing the same `Data.Semigroup` module for older GHCs.
>
>

<table><tr><th>Provide `MonadFail` instances</th>
<td>
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> See [
> prime:Libraries/Proposals/MonadFail](https://prime.haskell.org/intertrac/Libraries/Proposals/MonadFail) for more details.
>
>

>
>
> Again, in order to extend the compatibility window of your code it's recommended to provide instances early on. To this end, two warnings have been implemented to help with detecting code needing attention: `-Wmissing-monadfail-instances` (implied by `-Wcompat`) and `-Wnoncanonical-monadfail-instances` (not implied by `-Wcompat`).
>
>

>
>
> The [
> hackage:fail](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/fail) package helps avoiding `-XCPP` usage and emulates the new `Control.Monad.Fail` module.
>
>

#### Reworked `HasCallStack` API



GHC's callstack interface (formerly known as "implicit call stacks") is been reworked, hiding the implicit parameter behind a constraint synonym,


```
type HasCallStack = (?callStack :: CallStack) :: Constraint
```


Existing users of this functionality taking `callStack` arguments should be refactored to use this synonym if possible. This has the happy consequence that modules using this mechanism needn't enable `ImplicitParams`.



For instance,


```
{-# LANGUAGE ImplicitParams #-}
module AssertOdd where
import GHC.Stack (CallStack)
assertOdd :: (?callStack :: CallStack) => Int -> a -> a
assertOdd n
  | odd n     = id
  | otherwise = error "That number isn't odd!"
```


turns in to,


```
module AssertOdd where
import GHC.Stack (HasCallStack)
assertOdd :: HasCallStack => Int -> a -> a
assertOdd n
  | odd n     = id
  | otherwise = error "That number isn't odd!"
```

#### New `Generic` metadata representation



GHC 8.0 changes the way GHC generics encodes metadata. Previously, an empty data type would be generated for every datatype, constructor, and record selector associated with a `Generic` instance. For example:


```
data Example a = Example a deriving Generic
```


would have generated the following code prior to GHC 8.0:


```
instance Generic (Example a) where
  type Rep (Example a) =
    D1 D1Example
      (C1 C1_0Example
        (S1 NoSelector (Rec0 a)))
  ...

data D1Example
data C1_0Example

instance Datatype D1Example where ...
instance Constructor C1_0Example where ...
```


GHC 8.0, on the other hand, does not generate empty data types. The `M1` data type in `GHC.Generics` has been modified so that it is parameterized by a new `Meta` type:


```
data Meta = MetaData Symbol Symbol Symbol Bool
          | MetaCons Symbol FixityI Bool
          | MetaSel  (Maybe Symbol) SourceUnpackedness SourceStrictness DecidedStrictness

newtype M1 (i :: *) (c :: Meta) (f :: * -> *) (p :: *) = M1 { unM1 :: f p }
type D1 = M1 D
type C1 = M1 C
type S1 = M1 S
```


There is now only one instance for `Datatype`, `Constructor`, and `Selector`. (For more information on how this works, see [
this](https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/wiki/Commentary/Compiler/GenericDeriving#Type-levelmetadataencoding).)


```
instance Datatype ('MetaData n m p nt) where ...
instance Constructor ('MetaCons n f r) where ...
instance Selector ('MetaSel mn su ss ds) where ...
```


One major consequence of the additions to `MetaSel` is that the `NoSelector` datatype is insufficient to express all of the strictness properties of a record selector, so `NoSelector` was removed. If your generics-related code only mentions the `Datatype`, `Constructor`, and `Selector` typeclasses, it will not need to change. If your code does something more ambitious like checking for the presence of `NoSelector`, it will need to be updated to use `MetaSel` instead. For example, the above `Example` would have the following code generated:


```
instance Generic (Example a) where
  type Rep (Example a) =
    D1 ('MetaData "Example" "Module" "package" 'False)
      (C1 ('MetaCons "Example" 'PrefixI 'False)
        (S1 ('MetaSel 'Nothing 'NoSourceUnpackedness 'NoSourceStrictness 'DecidedLazy)
          (Rec0 a)))
```


Notice that since `Example` has no record selector, it generated `('MetaSel 'Nothing ...)` instead of `('MetaSel ('Just "recordName") ...)`.


### `template-haskell-2.11.0.0`


- Three `Info` constructors (`ClassOpI`, `DataConI`, and `VarI`) [
  no longer have](http://git.haskell.org/ghc.git/commitdiff/575abf42e218925e456bf765abb14f069ac048a0) a `Fixity` field. Instead, all `Fixity` information for a given `Name` is now determined through the `reifyFixity` function, which returns `Just` the fixity if there is an explicit fixity declaration for that `Name`, and `Nothing` otherwise.

- the `DataD`, `NewtypeD`, `DataInstD`, and `NewtypeInstD` constructors have a new field `Maybe Kind` ([\#10828](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/10828)), and take a `CxtQ` instead of a `[Name]` for the derived classes ([\#10819](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/10819)). If you don't know what to do, use `Nothing` for the kind signature. The field that used to be of type `[Name]` can be converted to a `CxtQ` using `mapM conT`.

  ```wiki
      - dataD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr]               -> [ConQ] -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + dataD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr] -> Maybe Kind -> [ConQ] -> CxtQ   -> DecQ

      - newtypeD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr]               -> ConQ -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + newtypeD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr] -> Maybe Kind -> ConQ -> CxtQ   -> DecQ

      - dataInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ]               -> [ConQ] -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + dataInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ] -> Maybe Kind -> [ConQ] -> CxtQ   -> DecQ

      - newtypeInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ]               -> ConQ -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + newtypeInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ] -> Maybe Kind -> ConQ -> CxtQ   -> DecQ
  ```

- The `Strict` datatype has been overhauled. The functional equivalent of `Strict` in `template-haskell-2.11.0.0` is `Bang`: 

  ```
  data Bang = Bang SourceUnpackedness SourceStrictness

  data SourceUnpackedness
    = NoSourceUnpackedness -- ^ @C                  a@
    | SourceNoUnpack       -- ^ @C {-# NOUNPACK #-} a@
    | SourceUnpack         -- ^ @C {-# UNPACK #-}   a@

  data SourceStrictness = NoSourceStrictness    -- ^ @C  a@
                        | SourceLazy            -- ^ @C ~a@
                        | SourceStrict          -- ^ @C !a@

  type BangType    = (Bang, Type)
  type VarBangType = (Name, Bang, Type)
  ```

  Note that the notions of unpackedness and strictness, which were previously combined in `Strict`, have now been decoupled. Also note the emphasis on *source*, as `Bang` represents what the user writes in source code. A field's *source* strictness may be quite different from what GHC actually *decides* to use as a field's strictness.

>
>
> For example, if `-XStrict` is enabled, GHC will decided that any field not marked with a laziness annotation (`~`) will become strict. So if you compile the following datatype with `-XStrict` enabled: 
>
>
> ```
> data Example a = Example a
> ```
>
>
> GHC will decide that `Example`'s field is strict. However, if you reify `Example`, its `Bang` value will be `Bang NoSourceUnpackedness NoSourceStrictness` because the user did not put an explicit strictness annotation (`!`) in the source code. To figure out what GHC decided, use the `reifyConStrictness` function:   
>
>
> ```
> reifyConStrictness :: Name -> Q [DecidedStrictness]
>
> data DecidedStrictness = DecidedLazy
>                        | DecidedStrict
>                        | DecidedUnpack
> ```


- The `InstanceD` constructor


  This was a late change introduced in GHC 8.0 RC4, see [
  discussion](https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2016-April/011803.html) for more details.


  of type `Dec` has an additional field of type `Maybe Overlap`. It is used to specify the overlapping behavior for the instances, as with the `{-# OVERLAP/S/PED/PING #-}` pragmas:

  ```
  data Dec = ... | InstanceD (Maybe Overlap) Cxt Type [Dec] | ...

  data Overlap = Overlappable | Overlapping | Overlaps | Incoherent
  ```

  Note that to reduce code breakage, and to support the common case, the corresponding `instanceD` function was not changed---it will produce instances where the "overlap" field is set to `Nothing`.  To generate instances with a specific overlapping behavior, please use `instanceWithOverlapD`.


  


---


## Tool changes


### `hsc2hs` defines an `#alignment` macro



Starting with version 0.68 [
hackage:hsc2hs](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hsc2hs) now supports the `#alignment` macro, which can be used to calculate the alignment of a struct in bytes. It is common for `.hsc` files to implement `#alignment` manually via a `#let` directive:


```
#let alignment t = "%lu", (unsigned long)offsetof(struct {char x__; t (y__); }, y__)
```


This command was incorporated into `hsc2hs` with the release of GHC 8.0. As a result, if you have the above directive in your code, it will now emit a warning when compiled with GHC 8.0:


```wiki
Module.hsc:24:0: warning: "hsc_alignment" redefined [enabled by default]
In file included from dist/build/Module_hsc_make.c:1:0:
/path/to/ghc/lib/template-hsc.h:88:0: note: this is the location of the previous definition
 #define hsc_alignment(t...) \
 ^
```


To make your code free of warnings on GHC 8.0 and earlier versions, surround the directive with a pragma checking for the right GHC version:


```
#if __GLASGOW_HASKELL__ < 800
#let alignment t = "%lu", (unsigned long)offsetof(struct {char x__; t (y__); }, y__)
#endif
```

---


## GHC API changes



Not all changes, just potential gotchas.


### `con_names` is no longer total for `ConDecl`



`ConDecl` now has two constructors, `ConDeclGADT` and `ConDeclH98`. The `con_names` field still exists for `ConDeclGADT`, but has become `con_name` for `ConDeclH98`.



So existing code will compile but break at runtime when processing a `ConDeclH98`.



The utility function `getConNames` should be used instead, which behaves like the old `con_names`.

Commit message:

mention more accurate detection of impredicative types

migration/8.0.md, after:




# GHC 8.0.x Migration Guide



This guide summarises the changes you may need to make to your code to migrate from GHC 7.10 to GHC 8.0. This guide complements the GHC 8.0.x release notes which should be consulted as well.


---


## Compiler changes


### Impredicative types brokenness



Note that the `-XImpredicativeTypes` extension, which has been
[known](impredicative-polymorphism) to be broken for many years, is even more
broken than usual in this release (see [\#11319](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/11319), [\#11675](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/11675), and others). During pre-release testing we encountered
a number of projects that broke with confusing type errors due to (often
unnecessary) use of `-XImpredicativeTypes`. Users of 
`-XImpredicativeTypes` do so at their own risk!


### Requirement for impredicative types



In previous versions of GHC, it was possible to hide an impredicative type behind a type synonym, because GHC did not always expand type synonyms when checking for impredicativity. GHC 8 is stricter in this regard, so code that compiled with `-XRankNTypes` may now require `-XImpredicativeTypes` (bearing in mind its potential brokenness) or may need to be rewritten to avoid impredicativity. See [\#10194](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/10194), [
this thread](https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2016-February/011367.html) and [
this thread](https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2016-May/012144.html).


### More conservative use of superclass constraints while solving



The compiler is now a bit more conservative in solving constraints previously
provided by superclasses (see [\#11762](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/11762)). For instance, consider this program,


```
{-# LANGUAGE FlexibleInstances #-}
{-# LANGUAGE UndecidableInstances #-}

class Super a
class (Super a) => Left a
class (Super a) => Right a
instance (Left a) => Right a    -- this is now an error
```


GHC now rejects the `Right a` instance, claiming it cannot deduce the `Super a`
superclass constraint of the `Right` typeclass. This stands in contrast to
previous releases, which would accept this declaration, using the `Super a`
constraint implied by the `Left a` constraint. To fix this simply add the
needed superclass constraint explicitly,


```
instance (Left a, Super a) => Right a
```

### `-fwarn-pointless-pragmas`



This flag has been removed and replaced by two flags `-Wmissed-specialisations` and `-Wall-missed-specialisations`.


### Old GADT record syntax



The old syntax for record constructors for a GADT has been removed


```
-- Old Syntax
data G2 a :: * where
  G2A { g2a :: a, g2b :: Int } :: G2 a

-- New Syntax
data G2 a :: * where
  G2A :: { g2a :: a, g2b :: Int } -> G2 a

```


This flag was widely regarded as a misfeature, in prior versions it issued a deprecation warning, it is now not supported at all.


### Old QuasiQuote syntax



The old syntax which allowed quotes to be prefixed by `$` has been removed. 


```
-- Old Syntax
foo = [$x| ... ] 

-- New Syntax
foo = [x| ... ]
```

### Kind-level definitions shuffled around



If you're using various bits of magic from within GHC and importing from `GHC.Prim` (for example, for `Constraint`), you'll find that some definitions have moved around. There is a simple fix: import from `GHC.Exts` instead. That module re-exports all of `GHC.Prim` and a few other internal modules. This change is also backward-compatible.


## Pattern Synonym Signatures


1. The ordering of the constraints has been changed so that required constraints appear before provided constraints. 

1. A single set of constraints corresponds to a set of required rather than provided constraints. 


For example:


```
--before

pattern P1 :: prov => req => ty

pattern P2 :: prov => ty

pattern P3 :: ()  => req => ty

pattern P4 :: ty

-- after 

pattern P1 :: req => prov => ty

pattern P2 :: ()  => prov => ty

pattern P3 :: req => ty

pattern P4 :: ty

```

---


## Library changes


### `base-4.9.0.0`


#### Recommendations for forward-compatibility



**TLDR**: The gist of the following paragraphs is to add some variation of the following snippet to your `.cabal` file, and address the warnings emitted by GHC when compiling your package:


```wiki
  if impl(ghc >= 8.0)
    ghc-options: -Wcompat -Wnoncanonical-monad-instances -Wnoncanonical-monadfail-instances
  else
    -- provide/emulate `Control.Monad.Fail` and `Data.Semigroups` API for pre-GHC8
    build-depends: fail == 4.9.*, semigroups == 0.18.*
```


The following suggestions are not mandatory but recommended for those who wish to make their code-bases compatible and/or make use of newly added features starting with GHC 8.0 thereby increasing the chance of extending the compatibility window of their code-base early on.


<table><tr><th>Normalise `Applicative`/`Monad` instance definitions</th>
<td>
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> `base-4.9.0.0` continues to generalise functions from `Monad` to `Applicative`. However, in order to avoid performance regressions due to sub-optimally defined `Applicative`/`Monad` instances, it's highly advised to follow the
> [ AMP+MRP refactoring guidelines ](migration/7.10#)
> that were already provided in the [GHC 7.10.x Migration Guide](migration/7.10).
>
>

>
>
> A new warning that needs to be enabled via `-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances` (not implied by `-Wcompat`) is available to help detect code which may be at risk.
>
>

<table><tr><th>Provide `Semigroup`/`Monoid` instances definitions</th>
<td>
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> Starting with `base-4.9.0.0`, `Data.Semigroup` has moved into `base`, kicking off the   [
> prime:Libraries/Proposals/SemigroupMonoid](https://prime.haskell.org/intertrac/Libraries/Proposals/SemigroupMonoid) roadmap which will eventually lead to have `Semigroup` become a proper superclass of `Monoid`.
>
>

>
>
> In order to smooth the transition, it's important to have `Semigroup` instances in place as soon as possible, especially in library packages. In order to aid detecting missing instances two warnings have been implemented in GHC 8.0 (both implied by `-Wcompat`): `-Wnoncanonical-monoid-instances` and `-Wsemigroup`. Those warnings also help defining the instances in compliance with the envisioned transition scheme.
>
>

>
>
> The [
> hackage:semigroups](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/semigroups) package can be used to avoid `-XCPP` usage by providing the same `Data.Semigroup` module for older GHCs.
>
>

<table><tr><th>Provide `MonadFail` instances</th>
<td>
</td></tr></table>


>
>
> See [
> prime:Libraries/Proposals/MonadFail](https://prime.haskell.org/intertrac/Libraries/Proposals/MonadFail) for more details.
>
>

>
>
> Again, in order to extend the compatibility window of your code it's recommended to provide instances early on. To this end, two warnings have been implemented to help with detecting code needing attention: `-Wmissing-monadfail-instances` (implied by `-Wcompat`) and `-Wnoncanonical-monadfail-instances` (not implied by `-Wcompat`).
>
>

>
>
> The [
> hackage:fail](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/fail) package helps avoiding `-XCPP` usage and emulates the new `Control.Monad.Fail` module.
>
>

#### Reworked `HasCallStack` API



GHC's callstack interface (formerly known as "implicit call stacks") is been reworked, hiding the implicit parameter behind a constraint synonym,


```
type HasCallStack = (?callStack :: CallStack) :: Constraint
```


Existing users of this functionality taking `callStack` arguments should be refactored to use this synonym if possible. This has the happy consequence that modules using this mechanism needn't enable `ImplicitParams`.



For instance,


```
{-# LANGUAGE ImplicitParams #-}
module AssertOdd where
import GHC.Stack (CallStack)
assertOdd :: (?callStack :: CallStack) => Int -> a -> a
assertOdd n
  | odd n     = id
  | otherwise = error "That number isn't odd!"
```


turns in to,


```
module AssertOdd where
import GHC.Stack (HasCallStack)
assertOdd :: HasCallStack => Int -> a -> a
assertOdd n
  | odd n     = id
  | otherwise = error "That number isn't odd!"
```

#### New `Generic` metadata representation



GHC 8.0 changes the way GHC generics encodes metadata. Previously, an empty data type would be generated for every datatype, constructor, and record selector associated with a `Generic` instance. For example:


```
data Example a = Example a deriving Generic
```


would have generated the following code prior to GHC 8.0:


```
instance Generic (Example a) where
  type Rep (Example a) =
    D1 D1Example
      (C1 C1_0Example
        (S1 NoSelector (Rec0 a)))
  ...

data D1Example
data C1_0Example

instance Datatype D1Example where ...
instance Constructor C1_0Example where ...
```


GHC 8.0, on the other hand, does not generate empty data types. The `M1` data type in `GHC.Generics` has been modified so that it is parameterized by a new `Meta` type:


```
data Meta = MetaData Symbol Symbol Symbol Bool
          | MetaCons Symbol FixityI Bool
          | MetaSel  (Maybe Symbol) SourceUnpackedness SourceStrictness DecidedStrictness

newtype M1 (i :: *) (c :: Meta) (f :: * -> *) (p :: *) = M1 { unM1 :: f p }
type D1 = M1 D
type C1 = M1 C
type S1 = M1 S
```


There is now only one instance for `Datatype`, `Constructor`, and `Selector`. (For more information on how this works, see [
this](https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/wiki/Commentary/Compiler/GenericDeriving#Type-levelmetadataencoding).)


```
instance Datatype ('MetaData n m p nt) where ...
instance Constructor ('MetaCons n f r) where ...
instance Selector ('MetaSel mn su ss ds) where ...
```


One major consequence of the additions to `MetaSel` is that the `NoSelector` datatype is insufficient to express all of the strictness properties of a record selector, so `NoSelector` was removed. If your generics-related code only mentions the `Datatype`, `Constructor`, and `Selector` typeclasses, it will not need to change. If your code does something more ambitious like checking for the presence of `NoSelector`, it will need to be updated to use `MetaSel` instead. For example, the above `Example` would have the following code generated:


```
instance Generic (Example a) where
  type Rep (Example a) =
    D1 ('MetaData "Example" "Module" "package" 'False)
      (C1 ('MetaCons "Example" 'PrefixI 'False)
        (S1 ('MetaSel 'Nothing 'NoSourceUnpackedness 'NoSourceStrictness 'DecidedLazy)
          (Rec0 a)))
```


Notice that since `Example` has no record selector, it generated `('MetaSel 'Nothing ...)` instead of `('MetaSel ('Just "recordName") ...)`.


### `template-haskell-2.11.0.0`


- Three `Info` constructors (`ClassOpI`, `DataConI`, and `VarI`) [
  no longer have](http://git.haskell.org/ghc.git/commitdiff/575abf42e218925e456bf765abb14f069ac048a0) a `Fixity` field. Instead, all `Fixity` information for a given `Name` is now determined through the `reifyFixity` function, which returns `Just` the fixity if there is an explicit fixity declaration for that `Name`, and `Nothing` otherwise.

- the `DataD`, `NewtypeD`, `DataInstD`, and `NewtypeInstD` constructors have a new field `Maybe Kind` ([\#10828](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/10828)), and take a `CxtQ` instead of a `[Name]` for the derived classes ([\#10819](https://gitlab.staging.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/issues/10819)). If you don't know what to do, use `Nothing` for the kind signature. The field that used to be of type `[Name]` can be converted to a `CxtQ` using `mapM conT`.

  ```wiki
      - dataD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr]               -> [ConQ] -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + dataD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr] -> Maybe Kind -> [ConQ] -> CxtQ   -> DecQ

      - newtypeD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr]               -> ConQ -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + newtypeD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TyVarBndr] -> Maybe Kind -> ConQ -> CxtQ   -> DecQ

      - dataInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ]               -> [ConQ] -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + dataInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ] -> Maybe Kind -> [ConQ] -> CxtQ   -> DecQ

      - newtypeInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ]               -> ConQ -> [Name] -> DecQ
      + newtypeInstD :: CxtQ -> Name -> [TypeQ] -> Maybe Kind -> ConQ -> CxtQ   -> DecQ
  ```

- The `Strict` datatype has been overhauled. The functional equivalent of `Strict` in `template-haskell-2.11.0.0` is `Bang`: 

  ```
  data Bang = Bang SourceUnpackedness SourceStrictness

  data SourceUnpackedness
    = NoSourceUnpackedness -- ^ @C                  a@
    | SourceNoUnpack       -- ^ @C {-# NOUNPACK #-} a@
    | SourceUnpack         -- ^ @C {-# UNPACK #-}   a@

  data SourceStrictness = NoSourceStrictness    -- ^ @C  a@
                        | SourceLazy            -- ^ @C ~a@
                        | SourceStrict          -- ^ @C !a@

  type BangType    = (Bang, Type)
  type VarBangType = (Name, Bang, Type)
  ```

  Note that the notions of unpackedness and strictness, which were previously combined in `Strict`, have now been decoupled. Also note the emphasis on *source*, as `Bang` represents what the user writes in source code. A field's *source* strictness may be quite different from what GHC actually *decides* to use as a field's strictness.

>
>
> For example, if `-XStrict` is enabled, GHC will decided that any field not marked with a laziness annotation (`~`) will become strict. So if you compile the following datatype with `-XStrict` enabled: 
>
>
> ```
> data Example a = Example a
> ```
>
>
> GHC will decide that `Example`'s field is strict. However, if you reify `Example`, its `Bang` value will be `Bang NoSourceUnpackedness NoSourceStrictness` because the user did not put an explicit strictness annotation (`!`) in the source code. To figure out what GHC decided, use the `reifyConStrictness` function:   
>
>
> ```
> reifyConStrictness :: Name -> Q [DecidedStrictness]
>
> data DecidedStrictness = DecidedLazy
>                        | DecidedStrict
>                        | DecidedUnpack
> ```


- The `InstanceD` constructor


  This was a late change introduced in GHC 8.0 RC4, see [
  discussion](https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2016-April/011803.html) for more details.


  of type `Dec` has an additional field of type `Maybe Overlap`. It is used to specify the overlapping behavior for the instances, as with the `{-# OVERLAP/S/PED/PING #-}` pragmas:

  ```
  data Dec = ... | InstanceD (Maybe Overlap) Cxt Type [Dec] | ...

  data Overlap = Overlappable | Overlapping | Overlaps | Incoherent
  ```

  Note that to reduce code breakage, and to support the common case, the corresponding `instanceD` function was not changed---it will produce instances where the "overlap" field is set to `Nothing`.  To generate instances with a specific overlapping behavior, please use `instanceWithOverlapD`.


  


---


## Tool changes


### `hsc2hs` defines an `#alignment` macro



Starting with version 0.68 [
hackage:hsc2hs](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hsc2hs) now supports the `#alignment` macro, which can be used to calculate the alignment of a struct in bytes. It is common for `.hsc` files to implement `#alignment` manually via a `#let` directive:


```
#let alignment t = "%lu", (unsigned long)offsetof(struct {char x__; t (y__); }, y__)
```


This command was incorporated into `hsc2hs` with the release of GHC 8.0. As a result, if you have the above directive in your code, it will now emit a warning when compiled with GHC 8.0:


```wiki
Module.hsc:24:0: warning: "hsc_alignment" redefined [enabled by default]
In file included from dist/build/Module_hsc_make.c:1:0:
/path/to/ghc/lib/template-hsc.h:88:0: note: this is the location of the previous definition
 #define hsc_alignment(t...) \
 ^
```


To make your code free of warnings on GHC 8.0 and earlier versions, surround the directive with a pragma checking for the right GHC version:


```
#if __GLASGOW_HASKELL__ < 800
#let alignment t = "%lu", (unsigned long)offsetof(struct {char x__; t (y__); }, y__)
#endif
```

---


## GHC API changes



Not all changes, just potential gotchas.


### `con_names` is no longer total for `ConDecl`



`ConDecl` now has two constructors, `ConDeclGADT` and `ConDeclH98`. The `con_names` field still exists for `ConDeclGADT`, but has become `con_name` for `ConDeclH98`.



So existing code will compile but break at runtime when processing a `ConDeclH98`.



The utility function `getConNames` should be used instead, which behaves like the old `con_names`.
