migration/8.4.md, before:




# GHC 8.4.x Migration Guide



This guide summarises the changes you may need to make to your code to migrate from GHC 8.2 to GHC 8.4. This guide complements the GHC 8.4.x release notes which should be consulted as well.


---


## Compiler changes


### `TypeInType` is pickier



Some code which previously typechecked in earlier versions of GHC without the use of the `TypeInType` extension will now require it in 8.4. For example:


```
myError :: forall (r :: RuntimeRep) . forall (a :: TYPE r) . String -> a
myError = error
```


In spirit, this function has always required the `TypeInType` extension, since the type variable `r` is also used as a kind variable in `forall (a :: TYPE r)`. However, GHC mistakenly didn't require the explicit use of `TypeInType` here in earlier versions. This has been rectified in 8.4, so now `myError` will not typecheck without `TypeInType` being explicitly enabled.



In addition, prior GHCs would permit this sort of GADT, where the GADT return type constrains a *kind* parameter, without the use of `TypeInType`:


```
data G (a :: k) where
  GInt :: G Int
```


Similarly, this now requires `TypeInType` in GHC 8.4.


### `TemplateHaskell` reification changes for GADTs



Before GHC 8.4, whether or not Template Haskell would reify a data type as a `GadtC` (or `RecGadtC`) was somewhat unpredictable, as it used heuristics to determine whether a data type was declared using GADT syntax or not. While this worked for most use cases, there were nevertheless some corner cases where a GADT would not be reified as a `GadtC`, and conversely, a non-GADT would be reified as a `GadtC`. For example:


```wiki
GHCi, version 8.2.1: http://www.haskell.org/ghc/  :? for help
λ> :set -XTemplateHaskell -XExistentialQuantification -XGADTs
λ> import Language.Haskell.TH
λ> data Foo a where MkFoo :: Show a => Foo a
λ> $(reify ''Foo >>= stringE . show)
"TyConI (DataD [] Ghci4.Foo [KindedTV a_6989586621679027473 StarT] Nothing [ForallC [] [AppT (ConT GHC.Show.Show) (VarT a_6989586621679027473)] (NormalC Ghci4.MkFoo [])] [])"
λ> data Bar a = (a ~ Int) => MkBar
λ> $(reify ''Bar >>= stringE . show)
"TyConI (DataD [] Ghci6.Bar [KindedTV a_6989586621679027637 StarT] Nothing [ForallC [KindedTV a_6989586621679027637 StarT] [AppT (AppT (ConT Data.Type.Equality.~) (VarT a_6989586621679027637)) (ConT GHC.Types.Int)] (GadtC [Ghci6.MkBar] [] (AppT (ConT Ghci6.Bar) (VarT a_6989586621679027637)))] [])"
```


Note that `Foo`, a GADT, is *not* reified as a `GadtC`, whereas `Bar`, which is not a GADT, *is* reified as a `GadtC`. In GHC 8.4, this bug has been fixed, so as a result, `Foo` will be reified as a `GadtC`, but `Bar` will not be, as one would expect.


---


## Library changes


### `base-4.11.0.0`


- The kind-monomorphic `Typeable[1-7]` classes, which were deprecated in GHC 7.8, have been removed from `Data.Typeable`. They can be replaced with the usual (kind-polymorphic) `Typeable` class.

### `template-haskell-2.13.0.0`


---


## Tool changes


---


## GHC API changes

Commit message:

Mention type variable ordering for GADTs

migration/8.4.md, after:




# GHC 8.4.x Migration Guide



This guide summarises the changes you may need to make to your code to migrate from GHC 8.2 to GHC 8.4. This guide complements the GHC 8.4.x release notes which should be consulted as well.


---


## Compiler changes


### Type variable order in GADT constructors



The order in which type variables are quantified in GADT constructor type signatures has changed. Before, if you had `MkT` as below:


```
data T a where
  MkT :: forall b a. b -> T a
```


Then the type of `MkT` would (counterintuitively) be `forall a b. b -> T a`! Now, GHC quantifies the type variables in the order that the users writes them, so the type of `MkT` is now `forall b a. b -> T a` (this matters for `TypeApplications`).


### `TypeInType` is pickier



Some code which previously typechecked in earlier versions of GHC without the use of the `TypeInType` extension will now require it in 8.4. For example:


```
myError :: forall (r :: RuntimeRep) . forall (a :: TYPE r) . String -> a
myError = error
```


In spirit, this function has always required the `TypeInType` extension, since the type variable `r` is also used as a kind variable in `forall (a :: TYPE r)`. However, GHC mistakenly didn't require the explicit use of `TypeInType` here in earlier versions. This has been rectified in 8.4, so now `myError` will not typecheck without `TypeInType` being explicitly enabled.



In addition, prior GHCs would permit this sort of GADT, where the GADT return type constrains a *kind* parameter, without the use of `TypeInType`:


```
data G (a :: k) where
  GInt :: G Int
```


Similarly, this now requires `TypeInType` in GHC 8.4.


### `TemplateHaskell` reification changes for GADTs



Before GHC 8.4, whether or not Template Haskell would reify a data type as a `GadtC` (or `RecGadtC`) was somewhat unpredictable, as it used heuristics to determine whether a data type was declared using GADT syntax or not. While this worked for most use cases, there were nevertheless some corner cases where a GADT would not be reified as a `GadtC`, and conversely, a non-GADT would be reified as a `GadtC`. For example:


```wiki
GHCi, version 8.2.1: http://www.haskell.org/ghc/  :? for help
λ> :set -XTemplateHaskell -XExistentialQuantification -XGADTs
λ> import Language.Haskell.TH
λ> data Foo a where MkFoo :: Show a => Foo a
λ> $(reify ''Foo >>= stringE . show)
"TyConI (DataD [] Ghci4.Foo [KindedTV a_6989586621679027473 StarT] Nothing [ForallC [] [AppT (ConT GHC.Show.Show) (VarT a_6989586621679027473)] (NormalC Ghci4.MkFoo [])] [])"
λ> data Bar a = (a ~ Int) => MkBar
λ> $(reify ''Bar >>= stringE . show)
"TyConI (DataD [] Ghci6.Bar [KindedTV a_6989586621679027637 StarT] Nothing [ForallC [KindedTV a_6989586621679027637 StarT] [AppT (AppT (ConT Data.Type.Equality.~) (VarT a_6989586621679027637)) (ConT GHC.Types.Int)] (GadtC [Ghci6.MkBar] [] (AppT (ConT Ghci6.Bar) (VarT a_6989586621679027637)))] [])"
```


Note that `Foo`, a GADT, is *not* reified as a `GadtC`, whereas `Bar`, which is not a GADT, *is* reified as a `GadtC`. In GHC 8.4, this bug has been fixed, so as a result, `Foo` will be reified as a `GadtC`, but `Bar` will not be, as one would expect.


---


## Library changes


### `base-4.11.0.0`


- The kind-monomorphic `Typeable[1-7]` classes, which were deprecated in GHC 7.8, have been removed from `Data.Typeable`. They can be replaced with the usual (kind-polymorphic) `Typeable` class.

### `template-haskell-2.13.0.0`


---


## Tool changes


---


## GHC API changes
