migration/8.8.md, before:




# GHC 8.8.x Migration Guide



This guide summarises the changes you may need to make to your code to migrate from GHC 8.6 to GHC 8.8. This guide complements the GHC 8.8.x release notes which should be consulted as well.


---


## Compiler changes


### Pattern-match coverage checking changes for strict fields



Consider the following function and data type:


```
data Foo = MkFoo1 Int | MkFoo2 !Void

f :: Foo -> Int
f (MkFoo1 i) = i
```


`f` is actually an exhaustive function. Because `MkFoo2` has a strict field of type `Void` (which has no terminating values which inhabit it), it's impossible to construct anything with `MkFoo2` without triggering an infinite loop or throwing an exception. Therefore, one cannot reach the `MkFoo2` case of `f`.



However, previous versions of GHC did not recognize this fact and flagged `f` as being non-exhaustive. As a workaround, one had to explicitly match on `MkFoo2` in `f`:


```
f :: Foo -> Int
f (MkFoo1 i) = i
f (MkFoo2 _) = error "unreachable"
```


However, now that GHC is smart enough to recognize that `MkFoo2` is unreachable, it will actually throw a warning (with `-Woverlapping-patterns` enabled) on the above code:


```wiki
    Pattern match is redundant
    In an equation for ‘f’: f (MkFoo2 _) = ...
```


As a result, some code which compiled without warnings on previous versions of GHC may emit warnings on GHC 8.8.


### Kind generalization changes for local definitions



Starting in GHC 8.8, we now generalize the kinds in the types of local definitions (e.g., `let`- or `where`-bound functions). As a result, there are a handful of programs which will no longer compile. Here is one such example:


```
type family LetGo :: k

foo :: Proxy (LetGo :: Type)
foo = undefined

sSconcat :: forall (x :: Type). x
sSconcat = undefined
   where sGo :: x -> Proxy LetGo
         sGo _ = foo
```


This kind-checks on previous versions of GHC, since the return kind of `LetGo` (in `sGo`) is not generalized, so we have `sGo :: x -> Proxy (LetGo :: Type)` (which is necessary for the body of `sGo` to typecheck). However, this will *not* kind-check on GHC 8.8, since the return kind of `LetGo` *is* generalized, giving us `sGo :: x -> Proxy (LetGo :: k)` (which is too polymorphic for `foo`). Therefore, this code fails on GHC 8.8 with a `Couldn't match type ‘k’ with ‘*’` error.



To avoid this, one can use an explicit kind signature on `LetGo`, like so:


```
  sGo :: x -> Proxy (LetGo :: Type)
  sGo _ = foo
```

### Template Haskell reification change for classes



If you have a type class like this:


```
class C a where
  method :: a
```


Then in previous versions of GHC, reifying `C` would give you something like this:


```
class C a where
  method :: forall a. C a => a
```


Notice that that `forall a. C a =>` in the type signature for `method` is completely redundant, since that's implied by the fact that it's a class method of `C`. This oversight has been fixed, so reifying `C` will now give you simply `a` as the type signature for `method`.



There may be code in the wild that previously depended on the assumption that reifying a class would put these redundant tyvars/class contexts at the front of each method's type signature, so it's possible that there may be breakage because of this.


### Changes to unused import warnings



GHC 8.8 tightened up the implementation of its unused import warning algorithm to more closely match the specification in [wiki:Commentary/Compiler/UnusedImports](commentary/compiler/unused-imports), as GHC 8.0 inadvertently introduced a [
regression](https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/ticket/13064) that caused it to stray from this specification. As a result, some programs which compile without warnings on GHC 8.0 through 8.6 will now produce warnings on GHC 8.8. A good example that illustrates this is this one:


```
{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wunused-imports #-}
module T13064 where

import Control.Applicative
import Prelude (IO, pure)   -- Import of 'pure' is redundant

foo :: IO ()
foo = () <$ pure ()
```


This produces no warnings on 8.0–8.6, but does warn on GHC 8.8:


```wiki
T13064.hs:5:1: warning: [-Wunused-imports (in -Wextra)]
    The import of ‘pure’ from module ‘Prelude’ is redundant
```


To summarize the reasoning from [wiki:Commentary/Compiler/UnusedImports](commentary/compiler/unused-imports), if an identifier `f` is imported from two different locations, once from `import A` and once from `import B (f)`, then GHC will mark the explicit import from `B` as redundant, since catch-all imports like `import A` "dominate" explicit imports like `import B (f)`.



If one wishes to keep this sort of compiling without any warnings on both GHC 8.8 and previous versions, there are two options. One is to make both imports catch-all:


```
{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wunused-imports #-}
module T13064 where

import Control.Applicative
import Prelude

foo :: IO ()
foo = () <$ pure ()
```


Alternatively, one can use `pure` qualified to avoid GHC warning about it:


```
{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wunused-imports #-}
module T13064 where

import Control.Applicative
import Prelude (IO, pure)

foo :: IO ()
foo = () <$ Prelude.pure ()
```

### Additions to the `-Wcompat` warning group



As part of [
this GHC proposal](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0030-remove-star-kind.rst), the uses of `*` that rely on the `StarIsType` extension now produce a warning:


```wiki
Prelude> type M = (Maybe :: * -> *)

<interactive>:1:20: warning: [-Wstar-is-type (in -Wcompat)]
    Using ‘*’ (or its Unicode variant) to mean ‘Data.Kind.Type’
    relies on the StarIsType extension, which will become
    deprecated in the future.
    Suggested fix: use ‘Type’ from ‘Data.Kind’ instead.
```


The recommended migration strategy is to follow the suggestion in the warning: import `Type` from the `Data.Kind` module and use it in place of `*`:


```wiki
Prelude Data.Kind> type M = (Maybe :: Type -> Type)
```

### More literal out-of-range warnings



GHC can now detect more uses of literal values that do not lie within the expected range dictated by their type. As a result, some code that GHC did not warn about in previous versions will now produce warnings with 8.8. Some examples of code that will now produce warnings are:


- Out-of-range unboxed literals, such as `100000000000000000000000000# :: Int#`.
- Out-of-range literal patterns, such as `(\x -> case (x :: Int) of 100000000000000000000000000000000 -> 0) 8 :: Int`.
- Negative `Natural` literals (from `Numeric.Natural`), such as `(-123) :: Natural`.
- Empty `Natural` enumerations, such as `[10..3] :: [Natural]`.

---


## Library changes



TODO

Commit message:

Mention stricter type synonym saturation checks

migration/8.8.md, after:




# GHC 8.8.x Migration Guide



This guide summarises the changes you may need to make to your code to migrate from GHC 8.6 to GHC 8.8. This guide complements the GHC 8.8.x release notes which should be consulted as well.


---


## Compiler changes


### Pattern-match coverage checking changes for strict fields



Consider the following function and data type:


```
data Foo = MkFoo1 Int | MkFoo2 !Void

f :: Foo -> Int
f (MkFoo1 i) = i
```


`f` is actually an exhaustive function. Because `MkFoo2` has a strict field of type `Void` (which has no terminating values which inhabit it), it's impossible to construct anything with `MkFoo2` without triggering an infinite loop or throwing an exception. Therefore, one cannot reach the `MkFoo2` case of `f`.



However, previous versions of GHC did not recognize this fact and flagged `f` as being non-exhaustive. As a workaround, one had to explicitly match on `MkFoo2` in `f`:


```
f :: Foo -> Int
f (MkFoo1 i) = i
f (MkFoo2 _) = error "unreachable"
```


However, now that GHC is smart enough to recognize that `MkFoo2` is unreachable, it will actually throw a warning (with `-Woverlapping-patterns` enabled) on the above code:


```wiki
    Pattern match is redundant
    In an equation for ‘f’: f (MkFoo2 _) = ...
```


As a result, some code which compiled without warnings on previous versions of GHC may emit warnings on GHC 8.8.


### Kind generalization changes for local definitions



Starting in GHC 8.8, we now generalize the kinds in the types of local definitions (e.g., `let`- or `where`-bound functions). As a result, there are a handful of programs which will no longer compile. Here is one such example:


```
type family LetGo :: k

foo :: Proxy (LetGo :: Type)
foo = undefined

sSconcat :: forall (x :: Type). x
sSconcat = undefined
   where sGo :: x -> Proxy LetGo
         sGo _ = foo
```


This kind-checks on previous versions of GHC, since the return kind of `LetGo` (in `sGo`) is not generalized, so we have `sGo :: x -> Proxy (LetGo :: Type)` (which is necessary for the body of `sGo` to typecheck). However, this will *not* kind-check on GHC 8.8, since the return kind of `LetGo` *is* generalized, giving us `sGo :: x -> Proxy (LetGo :: k)` (which is too polymorphic for `foo`). Therefore, this code fails on GHC 8.8 with a `Couldn't match type ‘k’ with ‘*’` error.



To avoid this, one can use an explicit kind signature on `LetGo`, like so:


```
  sGo :: x -> Proxy (LetGo :: Type)
  sGo _ = foo
```

### Template Haskell reification change for classes



If you have a type class like this:


```
class C a where
  method :: a
```


Then in previous versions of GHC, reifying `C` would give you something like this:


```
class C a where
  method :: forall a. C a => a
```


Notice that that `forall a. C a =>` in the type signature for `method` is completely redundant, since that's implied by the fact that it's a class method of `C`. This oversight has been fixed, so reifying `C` will now give you simply `a` as the type signature for `method`.



There may be code in the wild that previously depended on the assumption that reifying a class would put these redundant tyvars/class contexts at the front of each method's type signature, so it's possible that there may be breakage because of this.


### Changes to unused import warnings



GHC 8.8 tightened up the implementation of its unused import warning algorithm to more closely match the specification in [wiki:Commentary/Compiler/UnusedImports](commentary/compiler/unused-imports), as GHC 8.0 inadvertently introduced a [
regression](https://ghc.haskell.org/trac/ghc/ticket/13064) that caused it to stray from this specification. As a result, some programs which compile without warnings on GHC 8.0 through 8.6 will now produce warnings on GHC 8.8. A good example that illustrates this is this one:


```
{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wunused-imports #-}
module T13064 where

import Control.Applicative
import Prelude (IO, pure)   -- Import of 'pure' is redundant

foo :: IO ()
foo = () <$ pure ()
```


This produces no warnings on 8.0–8.6, but does warn on GHC 8.8:


```wiki
T13064.hs:5:1: warning: [-Wunused-imports (in -Wextra)]
    The import of ‘pure’ from module ‘Prelude’ is redundant
```


To summarize the reasoning from [wiki:Commentary/Compiler/UnusedImports](commentary/compiler/unused-imports), if an identifier `f` is imported from two different locations, once from `import A` and once from `import B (f)`, then GHC will mark the explicit import from `B` as redundant, since catch-all imports like `import A` "dominate" explicit imports like `import B (f)`.



If one wishes to keep this sort of compiling without any warnings on both GHC 8.8 and previous versions, there are two options. One is to make both imports catch-all:


```
{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wunused-imports #-}
module T13064 where

import Control.Applicative
import Prelude

foo :: IO ()
foo = () <$ pure ()
```


Alternatively, one can use `pure` qualified to avoid GHC warning about it:


```
{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wunused-imports #-}
module T13064 where

import Control.Applicative
import Prelude (IO, pure)

foo :: IO ()
foo = () <$ Prelude.pure ()
```

### Additions to the `-Wcompat` warning group



As part of [
this GHC proposal](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0030-remove-star-kind.rst), the uses of `*` that rely on the `StarIsType` extension now produce a warning:


```wiki
Prelude> type M = (Maybe :: * -> *)

<interactive>:1:20: warning: [-Wstar-is-type (in -Wcompat)]
    Using ‘*’ (or its Unicode variant) to mean ‘Data.Kind.Type’
    relies on the StarIsType extension, which will become
    deprecated in the future.
    Suggested fix: use ‘Type’ from ‘Data.Kind’ instead.
```


The recommended migration strategy is to follow the suggestion in the warning: import `Type` from the `Data.Kind` module and use it in place of `*`:


```wiki
Prelude Data.Kind> type M = (Maybe :: Type -> Type)
```

### More literal out-of-range warnings



GHC can now detect more uses of literal values that do not lie within the expected range dictated by their type. As a result, some code that GHC did not warn about in previous versions will now produce warnings with 8.8. Some examples of code that will now produce warnings are:


- Out-of-range unboxed literals, such as `100000000000000000000000000# :: Int#`.
- Out-of-range literal patterns, such as `(\x -> case (x :: Int) of 100000000000000000000000000000000 -> 0) 8 :: Int`.
- Negative `Natural` literals (from `Numeric.Natural`), such as `(-123) :: Natural`.
- Empty `Natural` enumerations, such as `[10..3] :: [Natural]`.

### Stricter checks on uses of unsaturated type synonyms



Previously, GHC would accept some uses of type synonyms which did not have all of their arguments supplied without requiring the `LiberalTypeSynonyms` extension. Starting with version 8.8, GHC is stricter about requiring the extension in these cases.



For example, this code requires `LiberalTypeSynonyms` in GHC 8.8:


```wiki
type Generic i o = forall x. i x -> o x
type Id x = x

foo :: Generic Id Id
foo = undefined
```


If GHC is complaining about type synonyms not being passed enough arguments or an 'illegal polymorphic type', try enabling `LiberalTypeSynonyms` in that module.


---


## Library changes



TODO
