testing-patches.md, before:




# Validating Patches



When you [contribute a patch](working-conventions/fixing-bugs) to GHC, it has to be validated before we push it to the master branch.



First, [add a new test](building/running-tests/adding), and [run it](building/running-tests/running).


## How to validate patches



There are three ways to validate your patch.


### Phabricator



Any patch submitted to [Phabricator](phabricator) is automatically validated by [Harbormaster](phabricator/harbormaster).


### Travis



Travis CI is a free-for-open-source continuous integration service. When your patch is not quite ready yet for review on Phabricator, you can let Travis validate it in the privacy of your own Github fork.


- Fork the GHC repository on [ Github](https://github.com/ghc/ghc).
- Sign up for [ Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/).
- During the signup process, flick your ghc repository fork switch on (it will be clear when you sign up).
- Push your changes to your Github fork (any branch will do).
- You (and only you) will get an email if your patch failed to build.
- If you make a fork of any of the submodule repositories (i.e. [
  ghc/packages-filepath](https://github.com/ghc/packages-filepath)), Travis will use it instead of the original. This is feature that Phabricator doesn't provide at the moment.
- Settings are in the file `.travis.yml`, though you shouldn't have to change anything. See the [Travis wiki page](travis) for details.

### Locally


- Get a repository containing the latest HEAD, the patches you want to push, and no other patches or unrecorded changes.
- In the root directory of the tree, run

  ```wiki
  ./validate
  ```

- Depending on the nature of the changes, more testing might be sensible. e.g. if possible, build system changes should be tested on Linux, Mac OS X and Windows machines.  Look at the full documentation for the [test suite](building/running-tests).


validate runs `make -j$THREADS`, where by default `THREADS` is the number of
cpus your computer has +1. You can set the environment variable `THREADS` to
override this. For a sequential build (and also test run) you would for example use


```wiki
THREADS=1 ./validate
```

## More details on the validate script


### Configuration files



`validate` usually starts by `make maintainer-clean` to make sure that everything builds from scratch.  Furthermore, it ignores the build settings you have put in `mk/build.mk`, and instead uses those in `mk/validate-settings.mk`.



You may want to validate a different configuration, e.g. with `GhcLibWays = p`. To do that, create a new file `mk/validate.mk` and put those settings in there.



After you run `validate` your tree will continue to use the same settings. The way to get back to using your own `build.mk` is to run `make distclean`.  Less brutally, simply remove the file `mk/are-validating.mk`.


### Flags



In order to save time while debugging problems revealed by validate, the validate script understands several flags. These flags, and others understood by `validate` are documented in the `validate` script itself.


- **`--no-clean`**:  validate will not clean the tree before starting, so it will continue a previous build.
- **`--testsuite-only`**: then validate will not build the tree at all, but only run the testsuite. This is useful if the problems validate found were only due to the testsuite falling out of sync with the code.
- **`--hpc`**: build stage2 with -fhpc, and see how much of the compiler the test suite covers.
- **`--fast`**:  validate skips the build-a-distribution step, and does not build the 'extra' packages (i.e. does not set `BUILD_EXTRA_PKGS=YES`, see [Building/Using](building/using#build-configuration)). 
- **`--slow`**: turns on `-DDEBUG` for the stage2 compiler, and runs more tests (except those that call `compiler_stats_num_fields`, those are skipped when debugging is on)
- **`--dph`**: set `BUILD_DPH=YES`.
- **`--quiet`**: show less output. By default all shell commands are shown so you can copy/paste and rerun them on failures.
- **`--help`**: show help.

### Validate has failing tests without any local patches; what do I do?



The best thing to do is to fix them! This will help make the world a better place, and gain you the admiration and thanks of your colleagues.



Fixing them could mean one of two things: Fix a bug in GHC (or the libraries) that the test is reporting, or fixing a broken test to not report a failure when nothing is actually going wrong.


#### I tried to fix them, but I got stuck



If you can't fix them yourself, then first file a ticket for the problem so that it doesn't get forgotten about. First run the testsuite for just that test (e.g. `make fast TEST=thefailingtest` in `testsuite` directory), and include the full testsuite output in the ticket description. If you found any information out that might be useful to someone later fixing the bug, add that too. Also, add the name of the test in the `Test Case` field.



Then add `expect_broken(123)` to the test options for that test, where `123` is the number of the ticket you just opened. If the problem only applies in certain circumstances, then only mark it broken for those circumstances, e.g. `when(opsys('mingw32'), expect_broken(123))`.

Commit message:

Mention mk/flavours/validate.mk

testing-patches.md, after:




# Validating Patches



When you [contribute a patch](working-conventions/fixing-bugs) to GHC, it has to be validated before we push it to the master branch.



First, [add a new test](building/running-tests/adding), and [run it](building/running-tests/running).


## How to validate patches



There are three ways to validate your patch.


### Phabricator



Any patch submitted to [Phabricator](phabricator) is automatically validated by [Harbormaster](phabricator/harbormaster).


### Travis



Travis CI is a free-for-open-source continuous integration service. When your patch is not quite ready yet for review on Phabricator, you can let Travis validate it in the privacy of your own Github fork.


- Fork the GHC repository on [ Github](https://github.com/ghc/ghc).
- Sign up for [ Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/).
- During the signup process, flick your ghc repository fork switch on (it will be clear when you sign up).
- Push your changes to your Github fork (any branch will do).
- You (and only you) will get an email if your patch failed to build.
- If you make a fork of any of the submodule repositories (i.e. [
  ghc/packages-filepath](https://github.com/ghc/packages-filepath)), Travis will use it instead of the original. This is feature that Phabricator doesn't provide at the moment.
- Settings are in the file `.travis.yml`, though you shouldn't have to change anything. See the [Travis wiki page](travis) for details.

### Locally


- Get a repository containing the latest HEAD, the patches you want to push, and no other patches or unrecorded changes.
- In the root directory of the tree, run

  ```wiki
  ./validate
  ```

- Depending on the nature of the changes, more testing might be sensible. e.g. if possible, build system changes should be tested on Linux, Mac OS X and Windows machines.  Look at the full documentation for the [test suite](building/running-tests).


validate runs `make -j$THREADS`, where by default `THREADS` is the number of
cpus your computer has +1. You can set the environment variable `THREADS` to
override this. For a sequential build (and also test run) you would for example use


```wiki
THREADS=1 ./validate
```

## More details on the validate script


### Configuration files



`validate` usually starts by `make maintainer-clean` to make sure that everything builds from scratch.  Furthermore, it ignores the build settings you have put in `mk/build.mk`, and instead uses those in `mk/flavours/validate.mk`.



You may want to validate a different configuration, e.g. with `GhcLibWays = p`. To do that, create a new file `mk/validate.mk` and put those settings in there. Settings in `mk/validate.mk` override those from `mk/flavours/validate.mk` (which in turn override those from `mk/config.mk`).



After you run `validate` your tree will continue to use the same settings. The way to get back to using your own `build.mk` is to run `make distclean`.  Less brutally, simply remove the file `mk/are-validating.mk`.


### Flags



In order to save time while debugging problems revealed by validate, the validate script understands several flags. These flags, and others understood by `validate` are documented in the `validate` script itself.


- **`--no-clean`**:  validate will not clean the tree before starting, so it will continue a previous build.
- **`--testsuite-only`**: then validate will not build the tree at all, but only run the testsuite. This is useful if the problems validate found were only due to the testsuite falling out of sync with the code.
- **`--hpc`**: build stage2 with -fhpc, and see how much of the compiler the test suite covers.
- **`--fast`**:  validate skips the build-a-distribution step, and does not build the 'extra' packages (i.e. does not set `BUILD_EXTRA_PKGS=YES`, see [Building/Using](building/using#build-configuration)). 
- **`--slow`**: turns on `-DDEBUG` for the stage2 compiler, and runs more tests (except those that call `compiler_stats_num_fields`, those are skipped when debugging is on)
- **`--dph`**: set `BUILD_DPH=YES`.
- **`--quiet`**: show less output. By default all shell commands are shown so you can copy/paste and rerun them on failures.
- **`--help`**: show help.

### Validate has failing tests without any local patches; what do I do?



The best thing to do is to fix them! This will help make the world a better place, and gain you the admiration and thanks of your colleagues.



Fixing them could mean one of two things: Fix a bug in GHC (or the libraries) that the test is reporting, or fixing a broken test to not report a failure when nothing is actually going wrong.


#### I tried to fix them, but I got stuck



If you can't fix them yourself, then first file a ticket for the problem so that it doesn't get forgotten about. First run the testsuite for just that test (e.g. `make fast TEST=thefailingtest` in `testsuite` directory), and include the full testsuite output in the ticket description. If you found any information out that might be useful to someone later fixing the bug, add that too. Also, add the name of the test in the `Test Case` field.



Then add `expect_broken(123)` to the test options for that test, where `123` is the number of the ticket you just opened. If the problem only applies in certain circumstances, then only mark it broken for those circumstances, e.g. `when(opsys('mingw32'), expect_broken(123))`.
